3800
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Physics-Informed Deep Operator Network for 3-D
Time-Domain Electromagnetic Modeling
Shutong Qi , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Costas D. Sarris , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— This article presents a modeling technique for
realistic 3-D electromagnetic problems in the time domain, using
a novel physics-informed deep operator network (PI-DON). The
training of the PI-DON is executed in two stages. In the first stage,
a neural operator is trained to approximate the curl operator in
Maxwell’s equations. In the second stage, the neural curl operator
is deployed with problem-specific settings to model electromag-
netic fields through an unsupervised training approach, utilizing
a physics-informed loss function. This unsupervised training
eliminates the need to generate ground-truth data and reduces the
volume of training data required, making PI-DON more efficient
than traditional deep neural networks. As an electromagnetic
solver, PI-DON demonstrates competitive efficiency compared to
finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) solvers for a single run,
even when accounting for its training time. Moreover, PI-DON
shows strong generalizability, allowing for accurate and efficient
uncertainty quantification and design optimization of microwave
geometries without additional training. We show the high accu-
racy, efficiency, and robust generalizability of the PI-DON solver
through the modeling and uncertainty quantification of 3-D
planar microwave circuits and a metasurface unit cell.
Index Terms— Computational electromagnetics, electromag-
netic fields, machine learning, physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs).
I. INTRODUCTION
S
CIENTIFIC machine learning (SciML) is a powerful tool
in computational physics, merging principles of scientific
computing with deep learning algorithms to model complex
physical phenomena. SciML has been widely applied to
computational electromagnetics [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. However,
most current research in SciML relies on a data-driven training
strategy, requiring significant computational resources for
generating ground-truth data and for the training process
itself. Additionally, since these networks are trained based on
specific datasets, their generalizability is limited when applied
to new problems beyond those included in the training set,
thus restricting their overall effectiveness.
Physics-informed
neural
networks
(PINNs)
[6]
have
emerged as a promising area of SciML for solving complex
partial differential equations (PDEs), such as the Navier–
Stokes equation [7] and the Schrödinger equation [8].
Received 28 September 2024; revised 30 November 2024; accepted
18 December 2024. Date of publication 31 December 2024; date of current
version 3 July 2025. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through Exploring
New Frontiers for Computational Electromagnetics with Scientific Machine
Learning under Grant RGPIN-2024-04326. (Corresponding author: Shutong
Qi.)
The authors are with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4,
Canada (e-mail: st.qi@mail.utoronto.ca; costas.sarris@utoronto.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMTT.2024.3521389
Additionally, PINNs have been successfully applied to inverse
problems [9]. PINNs apply physical laws as loss functions
within deep learning algorithms [10], [11]. This approach
enables PINNs to be trained in an unsupervised manner,
thus saving computational resources typically required to
generate ground-truth data. Despite their popularity and effec-
tiveness, PINNs suffer from significant challenges, including
poor training efficiency, unknown generalizability, and diffi-
culties in scaling to larger domains [12], [13], [14]. These
challenges limit the application of PINNs to real-world
problems.
A novel neural network architecture known as the deep
operator network (DeepONet) [15] offers further possibilities
for SciML. Unlike standard neural network solvers that dis-
cretize input and output spaces, DeepONets are trained to map
input to output functions continuously. This capability makes
DeepONets suitable for approximating operators, such as PDE
operators. DeepONets address a limitation of standard PINNs,
which typically solve only one specific problem per training.
Thus, DeepONets enhance the versatility and applicability of
SciML solvers.
In this work, a DeepONet is proposed to replace the
curl operator in Maxwell’s equations, referred to as the
deep curl operator (DCO). Then, the DCO is utilized to
solve Maxwell’s equations with problem-specific settings for
modeling practical electromagnetic problems. To that end,
the DCO is further trained using an unsupervised strategy,
driven by a physics-informed loss function. This extended
version of the DCO, which incorporates the physics-informed
loss function for solving Maxwell’s equations, is termed the
physics-informed DeepONet (PI-DON).
The proposed PI-DON offers three key advantages over
existing physics-informed machine learning models for solving
Maxwell’s equations [16], [17]. First, it simplifies the train-
ing process by narrowing the focus from solving the entire
problem to learning the curl operator. Second, the DeepONet
supports inputs of different sizes [18], allowing the PI-DON
to be applied to computational domains of varying dimensions
without modification. Third, the trained PI-DON demonstrates
strong generalizability. Once trained on a specific problem,
PI-DON can accurately solve a range of similar problems
without requiring additional training. This capability makes
PI-DON an ideal tool for uncertainty quantification and design
optimization, which requires numerous simulations to model
geometries with stochastically uncertain specifications [19].
We
trained
PI-DONs
to
model
two
different
planar
microwave circuits and a metasurface unit cell, consisting
of a split-ring resonator (SRR) and a strip wire. These
0018-9480 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3801
trained models were used to accurately quantify geometric
and material uncertainties in these structures. As a neural
network-based solver, PI-DONs can be executed in parallel on
GPUs for uncertainty quantification tasks, further increasing
their efficiency. We demonstrated the accuracy and efficiency
of PI-DONs by comparing their results to reference data
generated by a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) solver.
Numerical experiments showed that the PI-DON is faster than
FDTD, even considering training time, with a mean relative
error in the order of 10−3. Hence, we significantly extend
our previous work reported in [20], by introducing the DCO
and the associated PI-DON scheme. To our knowledge, this is
the first physics-informed machine learning model applied to
realistic 3-D microwave geometries, clearly demonstrating its
potential to surpass the efficiency of FDTD when numerous
simulations are required.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we provide an overview of PINNs and DeepONets and intro-
duce the proposed PI-DON workflow. In Section III, we show
the training process of the DCO. In Section IV, we integrate
the DCO into the PI-DON solver and analyze the stability
of the PI-DON. In Sections V and VI, we demonstrate the
accuracy, efficiency, and generalizability of the PI-DON for
3-D electromagnetic problems, along with its application to
uncertainty quantification studies. In Section VII, we summa-
rize our contributions.
II. OVERVIEW OF PINNS, DEEPONETS, AND THE
PROPOSED PHYSICS-INFORMED DEEPONET
In this section, we present an overview of general frame-
works for PINNs [6] and DeepONets [15]. Moreover, we show
the workflow of the proposed physics-informed DeepONet.
A. Physics-Informed Neural Networks
PINNs use PDEs and their associated boundary and initial
conditions as the loss function of a neural network. This
approach facilitates unsupervised training and eliminates the
need to generate ground-truth data. As an example, Fig. 1(a)
shows the application of the PINN algorithm to the transmis-
sion line (TL) equations. The TL equations are implemented as
a loss function by employing automatic differentiation (AD)
to approximate the partial derivatives of the voltage V (z, t)
and current I (z, t) with respect to z and t. Then, the network
is trained by minimizing this loss function using gradient-
based optimizers, such as the Adam [21] and L-BFGS [22],
to approximate the actual solution.
Although AD-based PINNs are effective for solving PDEs,
they have two significant constraints. First, the AD process
is conducted twice during training: once for loss computation
and once for backpropagation. This slows down the training
process, especially for complex equations and large computa-
tional domains. Second, the applicability of a trained PINN is
limited to the specific domain settings and the boundary/initial
conditions for which it was trained, reducing its effectiveness
under different scenarios. These issues limit the applicability
of PINNs to real-world, 3-D problems. To address the first
limitation, PINNs utilizing discrete losses have been developed
Fig. 1.
(a) Framework of a PINN for modeling transmission lines.
(b) Schematic illustration of the DeepONet.
to improve training efficiency [17], [23], [24]. Furthermore,
a new framework in SciML, known as the DeepONet, has
been introduced.
B. Deep Operator Networks
DeepONets have been introduced as a generalized version of
PINNs [10], to infer system responses in real-time for various
scenarios with minimal or no additional training. Consider an
operator G that maps an input function u to an output function
v, that is, G : u →v. DeepONets are designed to approximate
the operator G, by leveraging the principles of the universal
approximation theorem [25].
As depicted in Fig. 1(b), a DeepONet comprises two neural
networks: a branch network and a trunk network. These net-
works can adopt various architectures, such as fully connected
neural networks (FCNNs), convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), or graph neural networks (GNNs). The branch net-
work encodes the input function u on a set of sampling
points, while the trunk network encodes the spatiotemporal
coordinates of the output function v. DeepONet aims to
learn the operator G(u) evaluated at continuous spatiotemporal
coordinates ξ. The output of a DeepONet for a specified input
function ui is expressed as Gθ(ui; ξ), where θ = (W, b)
represents trainable parameters, including the weights W and
biases b, of the network. The trainable parameters θ are
optimized by a loss function
L(θ) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
wi|Gθ(ui; ξ) −vi(ξ)|2.
(1)
If the target function vi sampled at ξ is obtained by spe-
cific physical laws instead of the ground-truth data from
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3802
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 2.
Proposed PI-DON workflow for solving Maxwell’s equations in practical applications.
measurements or simulations, the DeepONet is trained in an
unsupervised, physics-informed way.
The operator learning strategy implemented by DeepONets
facilitates the solution of problems, which are characterized
by multiple pairs of input (ui) and output (vi) functions, with
a single training process. In this study, a neural operator G is
trained to approximate the curl operator for solving Maxwell’s
equations.
We show the detailed workflow of the proposed
physics-informed DeepONet for solving Maxwell’s equations
in Section II-C.
C. Proposed Physics-Informed DeepONet for 3-D
Electromagnetic Problems: Workflow
The workflow of the proposed PI-DON is illustrated in
Fig. 2. The process begins with training the DCO to approx-
imate the curl operator in Maxwell’s equations. The DCO is
developed using a modified 3-D U-net architecture, detailed
in Section III-A. We train the DCO with plane wave electric
fields propagating in free space to accurately approximate the
results of a curl operation. Then, we conduct numerical exper-
iments to confirm the DCO’s effectiveness with varying input
dimensions. Finally, the DCO is embedded within the PI-DON
framework to solve electromagnetic problems. We evaluate
the accuracy of the PI-DON solver by modeling a cavity
problem. We further assess its stability using the dynamic
mode decomposition (DMD) method [26]. We demonstrate the
feasibility and versatility of the PI-DON for practical electro-
magnetic problems, by modeling planar microwave circuits
and an SRR/strip wire unit cell. We also show the robust
generalizability of PI-DON and its accuracy and efficiency
for uncertainty quantification in modeling electromagnetic
structures.
III. DEEP CURL OPERATOR TRAINING STAGE
In this section, we present the architecture of the modified
U-net utilized as the DCO, along with details of the training
Fig. 3.
Architecture of the modified U-net used for DCO implementation.
data and training process. Additionally, we evaluate the accu-
racy of the trained DCO and demonstrate that it works with
varying input dimensions.
A. Architecture of the Deep Curl Operator
The DCO is implemented using a modified U-net archi-
tecture [27]. The conventional U-net structure is primarily
designed for 2-D data with a single downsampling branch.
We extended the U-net framework by incorporating 3-D con-
volutional kernels to solve 3-D problems. We also added an
extra downsampling branch to function as the trunk network in
the DeepONet, allowing it to process coordinate information.
As a DCO, this trunk network decodes coordinate informa-
tion into cell sizes, allowing its application across different
computational domains. An illustration of the modified U-net
structure for implementing the DCO is shown in Fig. 3.
The U-net architecture comprises two branches: a downsam-
pling branch and an upsampling branch. Each branch contains
L levels of corresponding blocks. In each block, there are two
3×3 × 3 convolution filters with an activation function. Unlike
the original U-net [27], which uses a nonsmooth ReLU [28]
as the activation function, we use Gaussian error linear units
(GELUs) to avoid stiff predictions [29] that decrease the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3803
accuracy of the DCO. The padding size of these two con-
volutional layers is 1 on each boundary, and the step size
of convolutional kernels is also 1, ensuring that the output
dimensions remain unchanged after each block. We add an
additional residual connection within each block to maintain
the gradient flow from the input feature map to the second
convolution layer. This residual connection facilitates deeper
layers in the network to learn residual functions with reference
to the layer inputs, enhancing the robustness of the neural
network as the number of levels (L) increases [30]. The
complexity of the U-net is determined by L. In Section III-C,
we will evaluate the influence of L on the performance of the
trained DCO.
In the downsampling branch, there is a max-pooling layer
between two neighboring blocks. The kernel size of the
max-pooling layer is 2×2 × 2, which halves the feature map
dimensions after each downsampling block. In the upsampling
branch, there is a transposed convolutional layer between each
block. The kernel size of this layer is also 2×2 × 2, doubling
the size of the feature map in each dimension after each block.
Consequently, the output dimensions remain the same as the
input dimensions after U-net computation, making the U-net
suitable as a neural operator [18].
The outputs of the two
downsampling branches are combined using the Hadamard
product, which performs element-wise multiplication of the
corresponding values from the branch and trunk networks.
This operation maintains the dimensions of the input feature
map, ensuring alignment of the feature map shapes between
the corresponding blocks in the downsampling and upsampling
branches.
Finally, between the downsampling branch and the upsam-
pling
branch,
there
is
a
skip
connection
between
the
corresponding block. In Fig. 3, it can be observed that the skip
connection directly copies the output from one downsampling
branch to the corresponding block in the upsampling branch.
This direct connection maintains multiple levels of features in
the training process.
B. Training Data: A Combination of Plane Waves
We generated a dataset of 3-D electric fields propagating in
free space. Each dataset, denoted by E, consists of multiple
plane waves and serves as the input for the U-net. The
corresponding ∇× E was computed analytically to provide
reference data for training the U-net. The generated input data
are defined as
E =
n
X
i=0
E0,iexp

−jki

xcosφsinθ + ysinφsinθ + zcosθ
	
.
(2)
The computational domain was discretized into 32 × 32 ×
32 cells in the x-, y-, and z-directions, with cell dimensions
1x, 1y, and 1z ranging from 0.3 to 0.8 mm. For each dataset,
the angles φ and θ were randomly chosen between −π and
π, and between 0 and π, respectively. After setting φ and θ,
multiple values of k were selected between 0 and 1048, result-
ing in a frequency spectrum ranging from 0 to 50 GHz. Next,
the amplitudes of Ex and Ey were generated using random
numbers between 0 and 5 for a specific ki. Subsequently, the
amplitude of Ez was computed by satisfying the following
condition:
ki · E0,i = 0
(3)
Ez,i = −cosφsinθ Ex,i + sinφsinθ Ey,i
cosθ
.
(4)
In this work, the accuracy is measured by the mean relative
error (MRE), which is calculated using the following formula:
MRE =
1
Nx Ny Nz
Nx,Ny,Nz
X
i, j,k=1




yp
i, j,k −yt
i, j,k
yt
i, j,k
,
if yt
i, j,k ̸= 0
yp
i, j,k
,
if yt
i, j,k = 0
(5)
where yt
i, j,k represents the analytical ground-truth data and
yp
i, j,k represents the predictions from the DCO.
The U-net output, ∇D × E, was normalized by the local
maximum for each component to improve prediction accu-
racy. This normalization reduced the MRE on the testing set
from 4.1 × 10−2 to 7.9 × 10−4. However, this normalization
was no longer necessary in the subsequent physics-informed
DeepONet, as the physics-informed loss function ensured high
prediction accuracy.
C. Training and Evaluation of the DCO Model
A dataset of 1000 samples was generated to train the U-net
to approximate the curl operator. Eighty percent of the data
was used for training, while the remaining was used for testing.
Each input dataset included two 3-D vectors representing the
coordinates and the corresponding E. The training process
utilized the Adam optimizer over 1000 epochs, with a learning
rate set to 10−4 and a batch size of 32.
We assessed the impact of the U-net complexity on the
performance of the trained DCO. The complexity was con-
trolled by the number of levels in the U-net architecture.
Each additional level introduced six convolutional layers (four
in the downsampling branch and two in the upsampling
branch), one max-pooling layer, and one transposed layer.
We tested two to five levels. The training and testing losses
over 1000 epochs are shown in Fig. 4.
Abrupt increases
are observed in the losses at specific epochs, particularly in
models with more U-Net levels. These increases arise from
unstable gradients during training, caused by increased model
complexity and sensitivity. Notably, the U-Net with five levels
shows the most frequent peaks, while the U-Net with two
levels achieves the smoothest convergence. We also recorded
the training time and prediction accuracy [measured by MRE
in (5)] on the testing set, presented in Table I. Based on
the accuracy and training time, we selected a U-net with
four levels for further experiments. Fig. 5 illustrates a set
of DCO’s inputs, predictions, and the errors compared to the
ground-truth analytical solutions. This test case was generated
with 1x = 1y = 1z = 0.6 mm, θ = 45◦, φ = 60◦, and
k consisting of 20 values uniformly selected from 0.021 to
838.34, resulting in a frequency spectrum ranging from 1 MHz
to 40 GHz.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3804
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 4.
Comparison of training and testing losses for different levels of the
U-net (L).
TABLE I
TRAINING TIME AND MRE FOR DIFFERENT LEVELS OF U-NET
Fig. 5.
Illustration of DCO’s input, prediction, and error compared to the
ground-truth data, showing the x, y, and z components.
D. Demonstration of the Dimension-Invariant Feature of the
DCO
Since the DCO is based on a fully convolutional U-net and
incorporates coordinate information as part of the input, it can
handle inputs of arbitrary sizes without additional specifica-
tions. The DCO was initially trained with input dimensions
of 32 × 32 × 32. We used the case shown in Fig. 5 to test
the adaptability of the DCO to different input dimensions.
The trained DCO was applied to predict the result of a curl
operation at the following input dimensions: 64 × 64 × 64,
32 × 64 × 16, and 64 × 96 × 16, with the cell size
computed based on a total length of 19.2 mm in each direc-
tion. The x component of the input E, the output ∇D × E,
Fig. 6.
Validation of the adaptability of the trained DCO to different input
dimensions, showing the x component. (a) Input dimension of 64 × 64 ×
64, MRE = 4.1 × 10−3. (b) Input dimension of 64 × 96 × 16, MRE =
3.8 × 10−3. (c) Input dimension of 32 × 64 × 16, MRE = 4.7 × 10−3.
and the corresponding difference compared to the analytical
ground-truth data are shown in Fig. 6. These results indicate
that the DCO effectively adapts to new input dimensions that
are not included in the training process. This adaptability to
arbitrary input dimensions enables the DCO to solve a wide
range of problems, which is essential for modeling real-world
scenarios. To ensure the accuracy of DCO-based numerical
simulations, we propose a physics-informed training strategy
designed to solve Maxwell’s equations accurately for any
problem in Section IV.
IV. APPLYING THE DCO TO SOLVE MAXWELL’S
EQUATIONS WITH A PHYSICS-INFORMED
LOSS FUNCTION
When using the DCO to model electromagnetic fields for a
specific case, it is further trained using a physics-informed
loss function. This model is referred to as PI-DON.
The
PI-DON solver employs the DCO to approximate the curl
operator in Maxwell’s equations and utilizes centered finite
differences to approximate the temporal derivatives of the elec-
tric and magnetic fields, which is similar to FDTD. Material
properties—such as permittivities and permeabilities—along
with boundary conditions are also taken into account. We
show the stability analysis of the PI-DON solver through the
DMD [26].
A. Physics-Informed DeepONet for Cavity Modeling
By approximating the partial derivative of electromagnetic
fields with respect to time using a centered finite difference
and the curl operator using the DCO, the update equation for
electromagnetic fields is modified as follows:
En+1 = En + 1t
ε ∇D × Hn+1/2
Hn+1/2 = Hn−1/2 −1t
µ ∇D × En
(6)
The training workflow of the PI-DON is outlined in
Algorithm 1. The electric fields, E, and magnetic fields, H, are
initialized as zero arrays. The training begins by optimizing
∇×H using the physics-informed loss function. Subsequently,
the E fields are updated based on the permittivity ε and
the time step 1t. Next, the excitation is applied by setting
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3805
Algorithm 1 Physics-Informed DeepONet Algorithm
Require: Nmax (maximum iterations), boundary conditions
for H and E fields, permittivity ε, and permeability µ,
1: Initialize fields E and H
2: N ←0
3: while N < Nmax do
4:
Train ∇× H using physics-informed loss function
5:
Update E fields using permittivity ε and 1˜t
6:
Implement excitation
7:
Train ∇× E using (7) (with boundary conditions)
8:
Update H fields using permeability µ and 1˜t
9:
N ←N + 1
10: end while
11: Output: Trained fields E at the sampling ports
(for hard sources [31]) or superimposing (for transparent
sources [31]) the source excitation to the E fields from
step 5, within the source region. Following this, ∇× E is
trained to update H fields based on the loss function defined
in (7), as shown at the bottom of the page. During this
step, boundary conditions—such as perfect electric conductors
(PECs) and absorbing boundary conditions—are implemented
as part of the loss function. In steps 4 and 7, the training is
terminated when the loss drops below 10−4. The mesh used
in PI-DON is generated similarly to the corresponding FDTD
simulation, with 10–20 points per wavelength at the highest
frequency of interest. In the training stage, the coordinates of
E and H fields are input into the trunk network of the DCO,
providing information on cell sizes. Since the training process
is completely unsupervised, it proceeds sequentially across
time steps. To ensure training stability, the time steps used
during training are subject to the CFL condition, as PI-DON
follows the FDTD scheme. The proposed PI-DON method
simultaneously processes the three components of E and H,
allowing Maxwell’s equations to be solved in parallel.
We tested the accuracy, efficiency, and stability of the
PI-DON in a 3-D cavity problem. The cavity was a cube with a
side length of 50 mm, discretized into 32 cells in each direction
and filled with air. The time step was 3.075 × 10−12 s in the
training stage. A unit amplitude Gaussian source was placed at
the center of the cube to excite the cavity modes, as illustrated
in Fig. 7(a). In the PI-DON framework, the excitation is intro-
duced by setting Ez with the corresponding Gaussian source
amplitude at the excitation point. The fields were terminated
by PECs on all sides of the cavity. These settings were the
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF RESONANT FREQUENCIES (UNIT: GHz)
same for both FDTD and PI-DON. The PECs were modeled
in the PI-DON by setting the predicted tangential components
on PECs to zero. Then, the loss function (7) was computed
using the updated predictions and used to optimize the DCO’s
parameters through backpropagation.
We modeled the electromagnetic fields within this cavity
for 8192 steps with the PI-DON and compared the results
with reference data from an FDTD solver with the same mesh
partition and time step. The training process took 583 s on an
Nvidia A6000 GPU, while an FDTD solver took 6.47 s on an
Intel i5 CPU. Although the PI-DON was slower than FDTD
for this specific cavity problem, the training and execution
time of PI-DON can be comparable or even shorter than that of
FDTD, depending on the problem, as discussed in Section V
on numerical experiments. Yet, PI-DON has a clear advantage
when repetitive runs are needed, such as in uncertainty
quantification. The comparison of the electromagnetic fields
in the time domain is shown in Fig. 7(b), where the Ez
component at z = 131z is sampled at 300, 600, and 900 time
steps. The MRE of the PI-DON results for each time step is
9.6 × 10−3.
We also computed the frequency spectrum of the fields
calculated by PI-DON and FDTD via Fourier transform, sam-
pling the Ez component at the position (121x, 121y, 131z).
The comparison between the frequency spectra generated
by PI-DON and FDTD is shown in Fig. 7(c). Furthermore,
we selected several resonant frequencies calculated by FDTD
and the PI-DON and compared them with analytical results,
in Table II. These comparisons demonstrate that the PI-DON
can achieve accuracy comparable to that of FDTD.
To demonstrate the necessity of DCO’s pretraining stage,
we solved the same cavity problem using the U-net with
random initialization. The comparison of the cumulative train-
ing losses between these two initialization methods over the
first 2000 time steps is shown in Fig. 8. The cumulative loss
represents the total loss summed over all training epochs at
each time step. The results show that training a DeepONet
L∇×E =
X
i, j,k
(
(∇D×E)x
i+1/2, j,k −
" 
E y
i, j+1/2,k+1 −E y
i, j+1/2,k
1z
!
−
 
Ez
i, j+1,k+1/2 −Ez
i, j,k+1/2
1y
!#)2
+
X
i, j,k
(
(∇D×E)y
i, j+1/2,k −
" E x
i+1/2, j,k+1 −E x
i+1/2, j,k
1z

−
 
Ez
i+1, j,k+1/2 −Ez
i, j,k+1/2
1x
!#)2
+
X
i, j,k
(
(∇D×E)z
i, j,k+1/2 −
" 
E y
i+1, j+1/2,k −E y
i, j+1/2,k
1x
!
−
 E x
i+1/2, j+1,k −E x
i+1/2, j,k
1y
#)2
(7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3806
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 7.
PI-DON for cavity modeling. (a) Cavity geometry. (b) Comparison of time-domain results from the PI-DON approach and an FDTD solver at
z = 131z within the cavity, evaluated at 300, 600, and 900 time steps. (c) Comparison of frequency spectra between the results from PI-DON and an FDTD
solver, with electromagnetic fields sampled at the position (121x, 121y, 131z) within the cavity.
Fig. 8.
Comparison of cumulative training losses between pretrained DCO
initialization and random initialization.
from scratch converges more slowly and with greater difficulty
compared to training with pretrained DCO initialization. This
comparison proves the importance of pretraining the DCO to
solve Maxwell’s equations.
To further evaluate the impact
of material properties on PI-DON’s training, a dielectric
block with dimensions 51x × 51y × 51z and a relative
permittivity of four was introduced into the cavity, centered at
(71x, 71y, 71z), as shown in Fig. 7(a). Then, the PI-DON
was trained again using both pretrained DCO initialization and
random initialization. The corresponding cumulative losses are
shown in Fig. 8. These results demonstrate that the existence of
multiple materials does not affect the performance advantage
of the pretrained DCO.
B. Stability Analysis of the PI-DON for Time-Domain
Electromagnetic Modeling
We have demonstrated that a PINN-based EM solver is not
subject to the stability limit of the FDTD method in [20]. This
motivates us to analyze the stability of a trained PI-DON for
a time step that is larger than the Courant–Fredrichs–Lewy
(CFL) limit [32] in an FDTD solver with the same mesh.
To this end, we employed the DMD method [26]. The DMD is
a data-driven technique for analyzing spatiotemporal patterns
from time-series data. Given multivariate time-series data,
DMD computes a set of dynamic modes, where each mode is
associated with a fixed oscillation frequency and decay/growth
rate. From the latter, we can deduce the stability/instability of
PI-DON at a given time step. Using DMD, a signal x(t) can
be reconstructed by
x(t) ≈˜x(t) = 9 exp
 eig t

b
(8)
where ˜x(t) is the reconstructed signal, 9 is the DMD basis,
b is the vector containing the projected initial conditions, and
eig is a diagonal matrix whose entries are the continuous
eigenvalues ωi = ln(λi)/1t, with 1t representing the time
step between the outputs. The eigenvalues typically appear as
complex conjugate pairs and constitute the DMD spectrum.
An eigenvalue with an amplitude greater than 1 corresponds
to an unstable mode, while an amplitude less than 1 indicates
a stable mode. Hence, we can use the DMD method to analyze
the stability of a trained PI-DON solver.
We applied the trained PI-DON to the 3-D cavity problem
described in Section IV-A. Let 1tmax represent the largest time
step allowed by the CFL limit in an FDTD solver with the
same mesh, and let
˜1t represent the time step in a PI-DON
solver. We set the time step of the PI-DON solver to
˜1t =
51tmax and applied the trained PI-DON to the cavity problem.
With this setting, the sampling rate was Nλ = 2.48 points per
wavelength (ppw), that is, close to the Nyquist limit.
At each time step, the predictions from the PI-DON were
reshaped into an N × 1 vector as the input to the DMD,
where N was the total number of points in the computational
domain. The PI-DON was trained for M = 8192 time steps
to model the cavity, resulting in ˜M = 1638 steps with ˜1t =
51t during the evaluation stage. Then, we applied the DMD
to the PI-DON’s predictions and obtained the corresponding
eigenvalues to assess the stability of the PI-DON solver.
As shown in Fig. 9, all the eigenvalues lie within the unit circle,
demonstrating the stability of this case. This feature makes
PI-DON an efficient solver for time-domain electromagnetic
modeling. In Sections V and VI, we apply the PI-DON to
model practical electromagnetic problems.
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENT I: UTILIZING THE PI-DON
FOR MODELING PLANAR MICROWAVE CIRCUITS
We have demonstrated that the DCO can be applied at arbi-
trary input dimensions in Section III and extended the DCO to
a PI-DON solver for time-domain electromagnetic modeling in
Section IV-A. Additionally, we showed that a trained PI-DON
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3807
Fig. 9.
Illustration of eigenvalues from the DMD method: PI-DON predic-
tions with ˜M = 1638 steps with ˜1t = 51t.
is not subject to the CFL limit during the evaluation process
in Section IV-B. These features make PI-DON an efficient and
versatile solver for time-domain electromagnetic modeling.
In this section, we apply the PI-DON to model 3-D practical
electromagnetic problems and quantify the effects of stochastic
uncertainty in geometric and material specifications.
We used the PI-DON to simulate the well-known benchmark
microwave structures of [33] to show its accuracy, efficiency,
and generalizability. For the PI-DON simulations, we adopted
the same mesh partition, time step, excitation, and boundary
conditions as in [33].
A transparent Gaussian source was
applied to Ez at the excitation port. To model open boundaries
of the computational domain (0 ≤x ≤xm, 0 ≤y ≤ym, and
0 ≤z ≤zm), a modified first-order Mur’s absorbing boundary
condition [34] was incorporated into the loss function. Loss
function terms were defined for the tangential electric field
components at the open boundaries: x = 0, x = xm; y = 0,
y = ym; and z = zm. For example, considering the Ex
component at the boundaries y = 0 and y = ym, the additional
loss terms for the Ex components at these boundaries are
Lx,y=0
ABC =
X
i,k∈y=0
E x,n+1
i+1/2,0,k −E x,n
i+1/2,1,k
−sy −1
sy + 1

E x,n+1
i+1/2,1,k −E x,n
i+1/2,0,k

2
Lx,y=ym
ABC
=
X
i,k∈y=ym
E x,n+1
i+1/2, jmax,k −E x,n
i+1/2, jmax−1,k
−sy −1
sy + 1

E x,n+1
i+1/2, jmax−1,k −E x,n
i+1/2, jmax,k

2
(9)
where sy = vp1t/1y, and v represents the phase velocity in
the corresponding material.
The total loss function for computing ∇× E in planar
microwave circuit cases is
L = αL∇×E + (1 −α)

Lx=0,xm
ABC
+ Ly=0,ym
ABC
+ Lz=zm
ABC

(10)
where Lx=0,xm
ABC
accounts for the losses of both Ey and Ez
components at x = 0 and x = xm, and similarly for Ly=0,ym
ABC
and Lz=zm
ABC . For the planar microwave circuits, the bottom
boundary at z = 0 is treated as a PEC by setting the tangential
components Ez=0
x
and Ez=0
y
to zero. The microstrip line
TABLE III
EXECUTION TIME COMPARISON BETWEEN FDTD AND PI-DON
FOR MC EXPERIMENTS AND ACCURACY OF PI-DON
Fig. 10.
Layout of a microstrip low-pass filter.
segments are also modeled as PECs using the same method.
In (10), α is a hyperparameter that starts from 0 and gradually
increases during training, prioritizing the ABC loss terms in
the early stages and ensuring a balanced contribution between
the losses for the internal fields and the boundary fields.
In this section, the FDTD experiments were executed on
an Intel i5-12600K CPU, while the PI-DON was trained and
evaluated on an Nvidia A6000 GPU. The accuracy of PI-DON
predictions was measured by the MRE, as defined in (5),
for the Ez component across the entire simulation domain,
averaged over each time step. For numerical experiments of
planar circuits, the execution times of PI-DON and FDTD,
as well as the MRE of PI-DON predictions, are presented in
Table III. The Monte Carlo (MC) method was employed to
quantify uncertainties in the geometry and material properties
of these planar circuits. Geometry perturbations were intro-
duced by adding/removing 1–3 cells along the direction of
the perturbation.
A. Microstrip Low-Pass Filter
First, we trained the PI-DON to model the microstrip low-
pass filter, shown in Fig. 10. We generated reference data by
using an FDTD solver on the same mesh. The comparisons
between the FDTD simulations and PI-DON predictions in
both the time and frequency domains are shown in Fig. 11.
The MRE for the PI-DON predictions is 1.9×10−3 compared
to the reference data. The filter was modeled with 4096 steps
in the FDTD simulation, which took 90 s. The training time
for PI-DON, based on the pretrained DCO, was 117 s. While
the physics-informed loss terms in (7) and (9) required more
computational resources than a single FDTD run, the overall
execution time of the PI-DON was comparable to that of
FDTD. In this case, we also compared the pretrained DCO
initialization with random initialization. The cumulative train-
ing loss comparison between these two initialization methods
for the first 1000 steps is shown in Fig. 12. The results
demonstrate the advantage of using the pretrained DCO.
As a neural network-based model, PI-DON can process
multiple cases simultaneously by batching them as its input,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3808
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 11. Comparison between the FDTD simulations and PI-DON predictions
of the microstrip filter in Fig. 10 for the training case. (a) Time-domain signals
for Ports 1 and 2 and (b) frequency-domain S-parameters.
Fig. 12.
Comparison of cumulative training losses between pretrained DCO
and random initialization for the simulation of the microstrip filter of Fig. 10.
enabling parallel computation of different scenarios. This
parallelization, along with its ability to use time steps beyond
the CFL limit, significantly enhances the efficiency of the PI-
DON solver, especially when multiple simulations are needed.
Uncertainty quantification, variability analysis, and design
optimization often require a large number of simulations
with varying input parameters. A trained PI-DON solver can
accurately model these uncertainties without further training,
serving as an efficient tool for uncertainty quantification.
To demonstrate this, we considered three uncertain param-
eters: the substrate dielectric constant (εr) and the lengths
d1 and d3 in the microstrip filter, as shown in Fig. 10. The range
of εr was set between 2.1 and 2.6, while d1 and d3 ranged from
4.88 to 6.50 mm. The lengths of d1 and d3 were varied by
21x from their original values [33]. A study of smaller per-
turbations would require a more elaborate mesh deformation
(as in [19]) and is beyond the scope of this article. In fact,
this relatively large interval of d1 and d3 values is a harder
test of the accuracy of the PI-DON. We employed the MC
method, generating ten uniformly distributed random values
for each parameter, resulting in a total of 1000 experiments.
Then, the PI-DON was used to produce the corresponding
Fig. 13.
Mean magnitude of S-parameters and the corresponding CI
from 1000 MC experiments for the microstrip filter shown in Fig. 10. (a) S11
and (b) S21.
Fig. 14.
Comparison of the probability density functions (pdfs) for the 6-dB
roll-off frequency of the microstrip filter of Fig. 10 computed by FDTD and
PI-DON.
results without requiring further training. During the evaluation
stage, the time step used in PI-DON, denoted as ˜1t, was set to
51tmax, where 1tmax represents the largest time step allowed
by the CFL limit in an FDTD solver with the same mesh.
Consequently, 4.44–4.5 points per wavelength were sampled
at the highest frequency. This time step setting was also used
in the simulation of a microstrip branch-line coupler, shown
in Section V-B.
The mean magnitude of the S-parameters and the corre-
sponding confidence interval (CI) from the MC trials for
both FDTD simulations and PI-DON predictions are presented
in Fig. 13. The limits of the 90% CI are derived from the
pdfs, such that 5% of the data are outside the upper and
lower bounds, respectively. The mean and CI from PI-DON’s
predictions are in close agreement with FDTD results across
the 0–20-GHz frequency range.
The 6-dB roll-off frequency, which refers to the frequency
at which |S21| drops to −6 dB, is critical for filter design
optimization. We extracted the 6-dB roll-off frequencies from
all trials predicted by the PI-DON and the corresponding
FDTD simulations. Subsequently, we approximated the pdfs of
these frequencies, as depicted in Fig. 14. We also collected all
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3809
Fig. 15. Comparison of frequency polygons for the microstrip filter of Fig. 10
between FDTD simulations and PI-DON predictions.
Fig. 16.
Layout of the microstrip branch-line coupler.
S-parameters from the MC trials and generated a histogram
of the amplitude of these S-parameters. By connecting the
midpoints of each bin in the histogram, we constructed a
frequency polygon, as shown in Fig. 15. The PI-DON’s pre-
dictions closely align with the corresponding FDTD results in
the frequency polygons.
B. Microstrip Branch-Line Coupler
The second microstrip circuit we modeled is a branch-line
coupler, shown in Fig. 16. A branch-line coupler is designed
to divide power equally between ports 3 and 4 from ports 1 or
2 at the operating frequency, with a phase difference of 90◦
between ports 3 and 4. In the FDTD simulation, 4096 time
steps were used to simulate the coupler, requiring 145 s.
We trained PI-DON to model this coupler, which took 105 s.
Notably, PI-DON was faster than FDTD in this case, even for
a single run.
To quantify the impact of uncertainties in εr, L1, and
L2 on the coupler, we applied the MC method, by generating
ten uniformly distributed random values for each parameter,
resulting in a total of 1000 simulations. The range for εr was
set between 2.1 and 2.6. The lengths of L1 and L2 were
varied by 21y and 21x, respectively, from the values reported
in [33], yielding a range of 8.93–10.56 mm. The mean S-
parameters and the corresponding 90% CIs from the MC trials
are presented in Fig. 17. The statistics of the phase difference
between ports 3 and 4 are illustrated in Fig. 17(e).
VI. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENT II: MODELING A
METASURFACE UNIT WITH UNCERTAINTY
QUANTIFICATION USING PI-DON
We have demonstrated the feasibility of PI-DON for solv-
ing realistic electromagnetic problems by modeling planar
microwave circuits. Our results show that the PI-DON is both
Fig. 17.
Mean magnitude of S-parameters for the branch-line coupler and
the corresponding CIs from 1000 MC experiments. (a) S11, (b) S21, (c) S31,
and (d) S41. (e) The mean phase difference between ports 3 and 4 of the
branch-line coupler and the corresponding CI calculated from MC trials.
accurate and efficient in quantifying uncertainties related to
geometric and material specifications. To further validate the
generalizability and effectiveness of PI-DON, we applied it to
a completely different scenario: modeling a metasurface unit
cell consisting of an SRR and a strip wire, as illustrated in
Fig. 18. This structure is based on the design presented in [35]
and originally proposed in [36].
This case features a different microwave geometry and
boundary conditions compared to planar microwave circuits.
The unit cell comprises an SRR and a strip wire, posi-
tioned within a waveguide terminated by open boundaries in
the z-direction. Periodic boundary conditions in the x- and
y-directions were applied using PECs and perfect magnetic
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3810
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 18.
(a) Geometry of an SRR/strip wire unit cell. (b) Modeling the
unit cell in a waveguide with open boundaries in the z-direction and periodic
boundary conditions in the x- and y-directions.
Fig. 19. Comparison between the FDTD simulations and PI-DON predictions
of the SRR/strip wire unit cell for the training case. (a) Time-domain signals
from Probes 1 and 2, and (b) frequency-domain S-parameters.
conductors (PMCs), respectively. A 0–22-GHz Gaussian pulse
was used to excite the structure,
applied as a plane wave,
as illustrated in Fig. 18(b). For the dimensions shown in
Fig. 18, the computational domain was divided into 48×64×
200 cells, with cell dimensions of 1x = 1y = 1z =
0.056 mm. The structure was simulated using 20 000 steps
of FDTD, which required 1208 s on an Intel i5-12600K CPU.
It took 631 s to train the PI-DON to model this structure
on an Nvidia A6000 GPU. This execution time comparison
demonstrated that the PI-DON was faster than FDTD for
modeling a single case, even when accounting for the training
time. The MRE of PI-DON’s predictions compared to the
FDTD simulations was 1.5 × 10−3. The time-domain fields
sampled from probes 1 and 2 are shown in Fig. 19(a) for both
FDTD and PI-DON. The S-parameters computed by FDTD
and the PI-DON are plotted in Fig. 19(d).
Fig. 20.
Absolute error of 0 ≤|S11| ≤1 in linear scale as a function of
frequency and points per period.
To satisfy the CFL condition, the time step used in FDTD
with 1x = 1y = 1z = 0.056 mm is much smaller than the
time step required to accurately sample the fields. By using
the trained PI-DON, we can use a larger time step that
exceeds the CFL limit. Hence, the fields can be sampled with
a time step selected based on accuracy rather than stability
considerations. We analyzed the influence of the time step
on the results of the PI-DON by increasing
˜1t from 51tmax
to 801tmax. The absolute error of |S11| predicted by PI-DON
was calculated compared to the ground-truth data from FDTD.
Fig. 20 shows the error as a function of frequency and points
per period up to 30 GHz. The error increases significantly as
points per period approaches the Nyquist limit of 2. For the
subsequent MC trials, ˜1t was set to 401tmax, corresponding to
7.88 points per period. This choice balances the computational
efficiency and prediction accuracy of the PI-DON.
The perturbations in the position and width of the SRR gap,
denoted by g1 and g2, as well as in the strip wire width (d1),
were assumed to follow a uniform distribution. The ranges
for g1 and g2 were set between 0.34 and 0.61 mm, with their
center positions varying from −0.11 to 0.11 mm. Similarly,
the range for d1 was set between 0.16 and 0.33 mm, with its
center varying within the same range of −0.11–0.11 mm.
We conducted 1512 MC trials using both FDTD and
PI-DON. The mean S-parameters and the corresponding CIs
are shown in Fig. 21. Additionally, we extracted the 6-dB
roll-off frequency of |S11| from all trials and presented the
pdf of these frequency points in Fig. 22. The results from
PI-DON closely aligned with the ground-truth data obtained
from FDTD simulations, demonstrating the accuracy of the
PI-DON approach.
Generating these results took approximately 153 CPU core
hours (1 h of computation time on a single CPU core)
using the FDTD method on a server provided by Compute
Canada, whereas PI-DON required only 1.05 h on an Nvidia
A6000 GPU. The MRE for the PI-DON predictions was
2.8×10−3. While the efficiency gains of PI-DON over FDTD
could be compensated by parallelizing FDTD simulations,
achieving comparable performance would require approxi-
mately 147 cores. In contrast, PI-DON requires only a single
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QI AND SARRIS: PI-DON FOR 3-D TIME-DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELING
3811
Fig. 21.
Mean magnitude of S-parameters and the corresponding CIs
from 1512 MC trials for quantifying uncertainties in an SRR/strip wire unit
cell. (a) S11. (b) S21.
Fig. 22.
PDFs of the 6-dB roll-off frequency of |S11| for the SRR/strip
wire unit cell computed using 1512 MC trials from both the PI-DON and the
FDTD.
GPU for the three cases presented in this article. Hence,
PI-DON offers advantages in terms of both computational
efficiency and the financial cost of hardware.
VII. CONCLUSION
We introduced a physics-informed DeepONet designed for
efficient and accurate time-domain electromagnetic modeling
with practical applications. By leveraging a physics-informed
training strategy and operator learning technique, PI-DON
overcomes the limitations of traditional data-driven models,
which require a lot of computational resources to generate
ground-truth data and for the training process itself. Instead,
the PI-DON can be trained without ground-truth data, applies
to a wide range of problems, and generalizes well to unseen
scenarios.
As a novel time-domain solver, PI-DON is not
constrained by a CFL-like stability limit; instead, its time
step is set based on accuracy rather than stability, similar
to unconditionally stable methods. For single simulations,
the total execution time for PI-DON (including training)
is generally comparable to, but often longer than, that of
conventional FDTD, depending on the specific application.
However, the combined advantages of unconditional stability
and generalizability to new scenarios are particularly powerful
for uncertainty quantification and design optimization studies,
which require a large number of repetitive simulations. These
results demonstrate that the proposed PI-DON is a feasible
paradigm for applying physics-informed machine learning to
realistic 3-D electromagnetic simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Tang et al., “Study on a Poisson’s equation solver based on deep
learning technique,” in Proc. IEEE Electr. Design Adv. Packag. Syst.
Symp. (EDAPS), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–3.
[2] H. M. Yao and L. J. Jiang, “Machine learning based neural network
solving methods for the FDTD method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Antennas Propag. USNC/URSI Nat. Radio Sci. Meeting, Jul. 2018,
pp. 2321–2322.
[3] S. Qi and C. D. Sarris, “Deep neural networks for rapid simulation of
planar microwave circuits based on their layouts,” IEEE Trans. Microw.
Theory Techn., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 4805–4815, Nov. 2022.
[4] F. Feng, W. Na, J. Jin, J. Zhang, W. Zhang, and Q. Zhang, “Artificial
neural networks for microwave computer-aided design: The state of the
art,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 4597–4619,
Nov. 2022.
[5] P. Wang et al., “A machine learning framework for the design of
STCDME structures in RIS applications,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 1467–1479, Mar. 2024.
[6] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang,
and L. Yang, “Physics-informed machine learning,” Nature Rev. Phys.,
vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 422–440, May 2021.
[7] J. Sirignano, J. F. MacArt, and J. B. Freund, “DPM: A deep learning
PDE augmentation method with application to large-eddy simulation,”
J. Comput. Phys., vol. 423, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 109811.
[8] D. Pfau, J. S. Spencer, A. G. Matthews, and W. M. C. Foulkes, “Ab initio
solution of the many-electron Schrödinger equation with deep neural
networks,” Phys. Rev. Res., vol. 2, no. 3, 2020, Art. no. 033429.
[9] M. Baldan, P. Di Barba, and D. A. Lowther, “Physics-informed neural
networks for inverse electromagnetic problems,” IEEE Trans. Magn.,
vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1–5, May 2023.
[10] L. Lu, X. Meng, Z. Mao, and G. E. Karniadakis, “DeepXDE: A deep
learning library for solving differential equations,” SIAM Rev., vol. 63,
no. 1, pp. 208–228, Jan. 2021.
[11] L. Lu, R. Pestourie, W. Yao, Z. Wang, F. Verdugo, and S. G. Johnson,
“Physics-informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse
design,” SIAM J. Scientific Comput., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. B1105–B1132,
Jan. 2021.
[12] N. Rahaman et al., “On the spectral bias of neural networks,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 5301–5310.
[13] B. Ronen, D. Jacobs, Y. Kasten, and S. Kritchman, “The convergence
rate of neural networks for learned functions of different frequencies,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11
[14] B. Moseley, “Physics-informed machine learning: From concepts to real-
world applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, St. Catherine’s College, Univ.
Oxford, Oxford, U.K., 2022.
[15] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Learning
nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal approximation
theorem of operators,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 218–229,
Mar. 2021.
[16] P. Zhang, Y. Hu, Y. Jin, S. Deng, X. Wu, and J. Chen, “A Maxwell’s
equations based deep learning method for time domain electromagnetic
simulations,” IEEE J. Multiscale Multiphys. Comput. Techn., vol. 6,
pp. 35–40, 2021.
[17] J. Lim and D. Psaltis, “MaxwellNet: Physics-driven deep neural network
training based on Maxwell’s equations,” APL Photon., vol. 7, no. 1,
Jan. 2022, Art. no. 011301.
[18] K. Azizzadenesheli, N. Kovachki, Z. Li, M. Liu-Schiaffini, J. Kossaifi,
and A. Anandkumar, “Neural operators for accelerating scientific sim-
ulations and design,” Nature Rev. Phys., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 320–328,
Apr. 2024.
[19] A. C. M. Austin and C. D. Sarris, “Efficient analysis of geometrical
uncertainty in the FDTD method using polynomial chaos with applica-
tion to microwave circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 61,
no. 12, pp. 4293–4301, Dec. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3812
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2025
[20] S. Qi and C. D. Sarris, “Hybrid physics-informed neural network for
the wave equation with unconditionally stable time-stepping,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 23, pp. 1356–1360, 2024.
[21] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[22] C. Zhu, R. H. Byrd, P. Lu, and J. Nocedal, “Algorithm 778: L-BFGS-
B: Fortran subroutines for large-scale bound-constrained optimization,”
ACM Trans. Math. Softw., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 550–560, Dec. 1997.
[23] P. Karnakov, S. Litvinov, and P. Koumoutsakos, “Optimizing a discrete
loss (ODIL) to solve forward and inverse problems for partial differential
equations using machine learning tools,” 2022, arXiv:2205.04611.
[24] Z. Fang, “A high-efficient hybrid physics-informed neural networks
based on convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5514–5526, Oct. 2022.
[25] T. Chen and H. Chen, “Universal approximation to nonlinear operators
by neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application
to dynamical systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 911–917, Jul. 1995.
[26] J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, B. W. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor, Dynamic
Mode Decomposition: Data-driven Modeling of Complex Systems. New
Delhi, India: SIAM, 2016.
[27] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[28] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
Boltzmann machines,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2010,
pp. 807–814.
[29] Z. Li et al., “Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differ-
ential equations,” 2020, arXiv:2003.03485.
[30] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[31] S. D. Gedney, Introduction To the Finite-Difference Time-Domain
(FDTD) Method for Electromagnetics. San Rafael, CA, USA: Morgan
& Claypool, 2011.
[32] R. Courant, K. Friedrichs, and H. Lewy, “On the partial difference
equations of mathematical physics,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 215–234, Mar. 1967.
[33] D. M. Sheen, S. M. Ali, M. D. Abouzahra, and J. A. Kong, “Application
of the three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain method to the
analysis of planar microstrip circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 849–857, Jul. 1990.
[34] G. Mur, “Absorbing boundary conditions for the finite-difference
approximation of the time-domain electromagnetic-field equations,”
IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat., vol. EMC-23, no. 4, pp. 377–382,
Nov. 1981.
[35] Q. Zhao and C. D. Sarris, “Discontinuous Galerkin time domain
modeling of metasurface geometries with multi-rate time stepping,” in
IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Jun. 2021, pp. 124–127.
[36] M. Chen and G. V. Eleftheriades, “Omega-bianisotropic wire-loop
Huygens’ metasurface for reflectionless wide-angle refraction,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1477–1490, Mar. 2020.
Shutong Qi (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree (Hons.) in electronic and
information engineering from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
His research interests include scientific machine
learning,
computational
electromagnetics,
multiphysics
simulation,
numerical
methods,
and microwave circuit modeling.
Mr. Qi was a recipient of the IEEE MTT-S
Graduate Fellowship in 2024.
Costas D. Sarris (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Diploma degree in electrical and computer engi-
neering from the National Technical University of
Athens, Athens, Greece, in 1997, and the M.Sc.
degree in applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, both in 2002 and
2002, respectively.
He is a Full Professor with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. His research area is
computational electromagnetics, with an emphasis on time-domain modeling,
adaptive mesh refinement, enhanced stability, and higher order methods. He
also works on physics-based wireless propagation models (with full-wave,
asymptotic, and hybrid techniques), uncertainty quantification, and scientific
machine learning.
Dr. Sarris was a recipient of the IEEE MTT-S Outstanding Young Engineer
Award in 2013 and an Early Researcher Award from the Ontario Government
in 2007. He was a Guest Editor of IEEE Microwave Magazine’s Special
Issue on Machine Learning for Microwave Engineering (October 2021),
and an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE
THEORY AND TECHNIQUES from 2009 to 2013 and the IEEE MICROWAVE
AND WIRELESS COMPONENTS LETTERS from 2007 to 2009. He served as
the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE JOURNAL ON MULTISCALE AND MUL-
TIPHYSICS COMPUTATIONAL TECHNIQUES from 2019 to 2024. He is a
Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society (AP-S)
for 2024–2026.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Southern University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on September 01,2026 at 07:10:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
